# Introduction

Health insurance denials have been increasing in the upcoming years, with Senator Wiener introducing legislation to hold insurance companies Accountable, known as the Health Insurance Accountability Act (SB 363), for 2025-2056. There are several reasons why claims are denied, including not being covered by the insurance, requiring prior authorization, or the physician not being in the insurer's network. Think Global Health, a reliable online bulletin that provides forum in how "health influences and interacts with broader social, economic, and demographic trends." posted an article titled "Claim Denied: U.S. Insurnace and Health Equity", which stated that non-Hisptanic white patients are twice less likely to get their claims denied compared to other demographics and patients that make $30,000 or less per household has a 43% more likely to be denied.  

As this problem continues to persist, this project will focus on the main reason why Insurance Companies are denying the claims, how much money hospitals are potentially losing and hopefully, this can provide insights on what hospitals can do to reduce these claims. Since Healthcare claims data are hard to obtain, the dataset contains synthetic data, but the analysis and approach are the same. 

# Insights

Based on the Data provided, there is a denial rate of 32.8% and the total loss is $98,069. The top two reasons are Incorrect Billing Information (loss of $15.3k) and Authorization not obtained ($13.64k), which make up for 29.5% of the Total loss. One of the solutions is to ensure that hospitals take more time reviewing the bill amount ( listing the Itemized Bill) and having the authorization to perform the procedure. The visualizations also showed that the CPT Code 99221 has the most denied claims for Incorrect billing information, which makes sense since CPT code 99221 is about Inpatient hospital care. Upon looking through the analysis, we noticed that CPT Code 99233 and CPT Code 99215 have the most denial claims.

If we look at the insurance company, more than half of insurance denials come from Commercial/private insurance companies, with 53% comes from "Lack of medical Necessity," and 39% coming from "pre-existing condition". However, if we look at the graph, we can see a decline in denials from May to September. If we look at self-pay, we can see it has a similar trend to Commercial. However, the primary reason why the Insurance denied these claims is because of a Duplicate claim. This can suggest that health care facilities are sending multiple claims of the same patient ID. This issue is so common that from May to September, there was a 60% increase and needs to be further investigated. Medicare and Medicaid are government-funded health insurance programs, with Medicare aiding individuals 65 and older while Medicaid is for individuals with limited income and resources. Medicare's primary reason for denial is "incorrect billing information". We can see how this is a common problem, as forgetfulness comes with age. For Medicaid, the primary reasons are "patient eligibility issues", having a 39% denial rate, and "lack of medical necessity", with a 38%. Data shows that the lack of medical necessity will continue to rise from May to September, as it has been steadily increasing. This can be related to patients abusing the program and continuously visiting a healthcare facility where it is not needed. 

# Conclusion

As healthcare denial claims continue to increase, the data shows that there are actions that can reduce the denial claims. Insurance companies will always find ways to deny claims, but if we are meticulous with our approaches (by hiring/training more staff who are thorough with the process), the healthcare system will slowly improve, and this war can finally be over. 
